---
title: "Beginner Blues & Swung Eighths"
author: "Rex Walters"
date: 2020-03-22T20:52:00-07:00
lastmod: 2020-03-22T20:52:00-07:00
draft: false
authorLink: ""
description: ""
license: ""

tags: ["beginner", "practice", "blues"]
categories: ["guitar"]
hiddenFromHomePage: true

featuredImage: ""
featuredImagePreview: ""

toc: true
autoCollapseToc: true
math: false
lightgallery: true
linkToMarkdown: true
share:
  enable: true
comment: true
---

Contrary to what I thought when I first started, the blues are far from simple! Even though the blues uses just three chords, the reasons behind them all being dom7 chords, for example are pretty complex. Things really get interesting when people like <a href="https://flypaper.soundfly.com/features/understanding-advanced-blues-harmony/" target="_blank">Brian Wilson or Ornette Coleman</a> get involved.

Still, a 12-bar blues almost always follows roughly the same chord changes. It usually moves to the IV chord in bar 4, for example, then back to the I in bar 6, and has some sort of turnaround in the last four bars.

<a name="TDG010">&nbsp;</a>
{{< admonition type="success" title="TDG010 • Beginner Blues" details=true >}}
Set a metronome to 60 BPM.

Record yourself playing a 12 bar blues in E (the chords E7, A7, and B7) using any chord shapes you are comfortable with. I recommend you keep it as simple as possible to start: just simple open position chords, and one chord stab on the first beat of each measure. Use a triplet or swung-eighth rhythym and play at least five complete cycles of the 12-bar form.

Pass criteria: Upon playback, does it sound good? Did your rhythm hold together? Were you able to keep your place?

Extra credit: Start jazzing it up a bit. Emphasize the flat 3 in each chord hammering on to the major 3rd. Try approaching chords from a fret below or a fret above. One very common trick is to temporarily move the V chord up a half step in the 12th bar. The last four beats sound like "Dah-duh DANK dah---" where "dank" means move the V chord up a fret for a beat. Can you still keep your place?
{{< /admonition >}}

If, like me, you want to solo and vamp freely over what other musicians are playing, you've got to know what chord is playing *right now*. You also need to anticipate what's coming up next (and precisely when). Solos sound best when you "play the changes" and hit chord tones precisely as the chord changes. Having a fairly static, consistent progression like the 12-bar form makes this process at least a little easier.

Before you can start playing the changes, however, it's critically important to **completely** absorb the sounds and rhythms of the blues. It's necessary to internalize the changes, playing and listening to them over, and over, and over, and over again until you can anticipate the changes without any conscious thought.

In other words, you must nail the **fundamentals** before moving onto more complex things like playing the changes.

### Rhythm: Swung Eighths

The first and most important fundamental for **any** music (not just the blues) is *rhythm*.

You can get away with murder (completely muffing notes and chords) as long as your rhythm is tight. The opposite is definitely not true, however. Even  perfect melody/harmony/articulation sounds *awful* if the rhythm is off.

While the blues can be played fairly straight, the most common rhythmic groove of the blues is based on triplets and swung eighths.

*Straight eighths* are more common in rock and other music. Straight eighths usually sound like:

One-and **two**-and three-and **four**-and

with equal spacing between each pulse (the numbered beats as well as the "ands"). It's most common to emphasize the backbeats (beats two and four as shown).

A blues progression with a fast straight eighths groove immediately sounds rock-and-roll (tap along to <a href="https://youtu.be/p0FLZyTZBJ4">Johnny B. Goode by Chuck Berry</a>, for example).

**Triplets** have three pulses per beat:

One-and-a **two**-and-a three-and-a **four**-and-a

Again, equal spacing between each of the pulses, but triplets come in groups of three rather than two. The gap between each beat of three pulses is the same as the gap between each pulse within a beat (but usually the first pulse in each group of three is emphasized a bit more by strumming a little harder). An example of the triplet feel is <a href="https://youtu.be/bQQCPrwKzdo">Blueberry Hill by Fats Domino</a> (listen to the drummer playing the hi-hat &mdash; that "tididih tididih" sound is the sound of triplets).

*Swung eighths* are kind of like triplets, but without the middle pulse:

one-...-a   **two**-...-a   three-...-a   **four**-...-a

The spacing is unequal with swung eighths. There is a longer pause between the downbeat and the upbeat. <a href="https://youtu.be/ejr2S7bN0V8?&t=3m22s">Matt Smith describes the sound as the "clip-clop" of horses in old western movies</a>. Some people also call it the "flat tire" rhythm because of the uneven sound of a punctured tire rolling around the rim.

A classic example of the swung eighth groove is <a href="https://youtu.be/n2cygQ3p_-A?&t=1m10s">Jimi Hendrix playing Red House</a> (again, pay particular attention to the drums to hear the rhythm &mdash; a mix of triplets and swung eighths).

Before studying anything else with the blues, it's important to practice actually playing swung eighths *with a metronome*. I'd recommend spending at least a few **hours** if not days just practicing this rhythm until it is completely ingrained and automatic.

{{< youtube 7cPSRdpq8iQ  >}}

Modern blues tends to emphasize the backbeats. In slower tempos, the backbeats are the "ands" (or a's) rather than the downbeats. At faster tempos, it's beats two and four. Simply emphasizing the backbeat can dramatically improve the overall groove of the progression.

{{< youtube 1CW3CWGVQdA  >}}

### Not losing your place

Even though the basic 12-bar blues has a simple structure, and the chords almost always come in the same place, that doesn't mean it isn't easy to get lost.

Personally, I found it incredibly easy to get lost while I was playing. I was using so much mental capacity performing whatever I was doing (remembering chords, licks, tricky rhythms, whatever) that I lost place within the progression. Wait, is this bar 4 or bar 8?

When you lose your place in a band situation, it's almost always best to just **take your hands off the guitar** and wait a few measures until you are certain where you are before picking up again. Silence will invariably sound better than something flat wrong.

The only way to avoid getting lost at all is to practice the progression so many times that it becomes subconscious. It's also important to eliminate any unnecessary complexity and just focus on the progression until you hear it in your sleep.

{{< youtube of4Fjme32eQ  >}}

Before studying anything else with the blues, I strongly recommend putting in some serious practice on just these two elements: the swung eighth rhythm, and starting to hear and anticipate the changes in the chord progression.
