---
date: 2020-04-14T21:14:25-07:00
title: "FAD I-IV-V"
linkTitle: "FAD I-IV-V"
author: "Rex Walters"
description: "I-IV-V progressions using FAD chords"
tdgid: "D0004-070"
tutorial: "guitar/Fundamentals/harmony/triads/FAD#rexs-fad"
type: "docs"
weight: 60
---

{{% tdgtutorial %}}

This is proficiency test **{{% param tdgid %}}**

## Demonstration

{{< alert color="success" title="TDG0000" >}}
TODO
{{< /alert >}}

## Procedure

For a change, this is a pretty musical sounding exercise.

This test is to play I-IV-I-V-I chord progressions on the top four strings in every key, while moving your hand as little as possible.

We will be playing major triads on the top *four* strings. You can view this as "merged" forms of the DGB and GBE triads, or simply recognize that the same note is doubled on the highest and lowest notes. For the A form triad with the root on the G string, you can choose to play either then &circ;5 or the &circ;1 on the top string (the latter is easier to finger).

The test is performed with quarter notes at 110 BPM. Play bars of four beats, with one chord per bar.

As always, we will progress through the cycle of fourths (which hopefully you've memorized by now!).

1. Find the lowest four string triad shape on the neck for the current note. That is your I chord. Visualize where the root is in that shape, then visualize where the 4th and 5th scale degrees lie on adjacent strings.

2. Play each chord in the progression at that position. Strum the I chord four times (one per click) then four beats of the IV, etc. Complete the I-IV-I-V-I progression at that position. Avoid moving your hand any more than necessary (use the root notes you identified in step 1).

3. Move up the neck to the next triad shape for the I chord and repeat the I-IV-I-V-I progression.

4. Move up the neck again and to the final triad shape for the I chord and repeat the progression again.

Complete steps 1-4 for every natural note key (progressing in fourths).


## Pass criteria

Complete the exercise with quarter notes at 110BPM and four beats per chord without any mistakes.
