---
date: 2020-04-10T13:51:18-07:00
title: "Thoughts on how to Practice"
linkTitle: "Practice thoughts"
author: "Rex Walters"
description: "My philosophy about practice"
type: "docs"
weight: 1
resources:
  - src: "**distractions.jpg"
    title: "distractions"
---

Nobody improves without practice, **regular** practice. But too many people
(myself included) unconsciously start to dread (and thus avoid) their practice
sessions. I believe this happens for just two reasons: _motivation_ and _time_.

<!--more-->

This page contains my thoughts and philosophy regarding practice, but doesn't
actually teach you a system. 

If you want to skip the theory and just learn my system for [_how_ to
practice]({{< ref "guitar/tests" >}}), please see the last chapter in this
document.

## Motivation

It's all too easy to despair about your lack of progress on the instrument
(trust me, we've all been there). I also know full well how "life intrudes."

I've found a few things that help with both issues, however.

It's important to find as many ways as possible to make practice as easy and
**pleasurable** as possible. This includes making _where_ you practice as
pleasant as possible: bright, clutter free, and someplace you want to be.

It's totally legit to bribe yourself with new toys, too: new
guitars/pedals/amp/software (or simply new strings). Anything that makes you
want to practice is good (just try too at least recognize when you are playing
with new toys more than actually practicing).

### Play vs. practice

One thing practice should never be, however, is relaxing. If you aren't pushing
yourself in some way, you simply aren't practicing. Practice takes focus and
effort.

Sitting on the couch and mindlessly noodling while watching TV isn't practice,
it's playing. Noodling does provide some value (your body will get some
mechanical benefit from familiarity and constant contact/exercise on the
instrument) but without some sort of structure its inefficient at best, and it's
definitely not practice.

We all do it. But don't get confused: _playing_ isn't _practicing_ and you need
practice to improve.

Even five minutes of focus and pushing suffices for an individual practice session.

The "pushing" can be mental or it can be physical, and you should strive to
balance the two.

Don't get me wrong: Playing before or after practice (even mindless sofa
noodling) is a great thing! It's even okay to skip practice altogether some
days. The whole point of the pursuit (for amateurs) is to have fun.

Instead of guilt, you should reward yourself if you even pick up the guitar on
any given day. The reward can be as simple as a beverage, a snack, or even
allowing yourself a few minutes surfing the web or watching cat videos. Whatever
feels like a small reward.

Try, however, to get in at least a few minutes of focused practice in along with
your play, almost every single day. Five minutes a day for four our five days
per week is **way** better than a multi-hour marathon session every few weeks.
Twenty minutes a day is even better.

### Balance and bite-sized chunks

Engineers like myself tend to be a bit obsessive. Once we set ourselves to a
task, we focus on it almost to the exclusion of everything else. Worse, we tend
to set ourselves absurdly over-aggressive goals. Without actually saying or
writing it down, we'll think something as silly as

"I want to learn to play [whatever song]. I'll keep practicing until it sounds
just like [whatever world-class professional] on the record."

Then we'll mono-maniacally practice that and only that for the next several
days, weeks, or months until we succeed or (more likely) are ready to give up
the instrument.

### The six T's

One trick I've found useful to balance your exercise time is to categorize
exercises into one of six categories, what I call the "six T's":

> <img src="/svg/training.svg" style="width: 1rem; height: 1rem;" > Training
> (default)

> <img src="/svg/tunes.svg" style="width: 1rem; height: 1rem;" > Tunes
> (repertoire)

> <img src="/svg/theory.svg" style="width: 1rem; height: 1rem;" > Theory (book
> learnining)

> <img src="/svg/technique.svg" style="width: 1rem; height: 1rem;" > Technique
> (dexterity and "chops")

> <img src="/svg/timing.svg" style="width: 1rem; height: 1rem;" > Timing (rhythm &
> groove)

> <img src="/svg/tones.svg" style="width: 1rem; height: 1rem;" > Tones (ear-training)

Most things you practice will fall into the default "Training" category, either
because they are hard to categorize, or overlap several categories fairly
equally.

Other items will fall predominantly into one of the remaining categories:

Tunes are what it's all about. They are exercises that synthesize all you've
learned to play actual songs.

Theory means the fundamental concepts that help us think about and discuss
music with others (concepts like harmony and the circle of fifths). Most
"theory" exercises will involve rote memorization.

Technique is for exercises that _primarily_ improve your manual dexterity. Not
necessarily musical exercises, but things like "spider" exercises to improve
finger independence.

Timing is for drills that focus almost exclusively on your internal sense of
rhythm.

Lastly, tones are exercises that focus exclusively on ear training.

I use what I call a [focus list]({{< ref "guitar/tests#focus-list" >}}). I may
well call an audible on any given day, though.

If I don't particularly feel like learning a song, I may work on something more
theoretical: harmony and triads, a particular scale or mode, etc.

If I'm tired and don't feel up to brain work _or_ difficult fingerboard
exercises, I'll put on a metronome or drum loop and just try to improvise a
groove of some sort (this [YouTube Video by
Guitargate](https://youtu.be/7y9sdICaEds) is a great example of this kind of
practice).

### What _not_ to do

Let's say for example that you'd like to learn [the song Blackbird by the
Beatles](https://www.guitardownunder.com/_scores/blackbird.pdf). (Beginners
might think this is a reasonable goal for one or two practice sessions, but I'd
consider it a higher-level medium or long term goal that will likely take weeks
at best).

The mono-maniacal approach is to find the tab, start at bar 1 every session for
weeks on end, play from the beginning until you make a mistake, then restart
from the beginning.

Inevitably, you'll find after a few weeks that you've practiced the first few
bars umpteen bazillion times but have yet to reach the end of the song.

It's a terrible way to practice, but sadly it's also terribly common.

Far, far better would be to set a schedule for yourself and force yourself to
stick to it. Break the song up into bite-sized sections: maybe bars 1-4 during
the first session, 5-8 the next, and so on (there are 35 bars in the tab linked
to above).

If nothing else, this ensures you give equal time to every section (unlike
always starting from the beginning). After getting through the whole song,
you'll know which sections are most difficult and where to spend the bulk of
your practice time.

The idea is to practice what you _don't_ know and what you find _difficult_,
**not to keep practicing what you already know**! Sounds obvious, but our brains
and bodies are sneaky and lazy: they don't like to be pushed and will always try
to go back to what they find easier.

Even better is to break up and extend your practice sessions using the six T's.
In addition to just learning the Tune, add some relevant things from the other
T's:

For technique practice you might want to spend some time on fingerpicking in
general (dexterity exercises or whatever).

For theory you may want to figure out the chords in the harmonized G Major scale
(the song's in G) or figure out why there's an A7 (a major chord) in bar 5 even
though the diatonic chord in the key of G Major is A minor.

For ear training, you may put on the record, pausing occasionally to see if you
can recognize and pick out some of the intervals that Paul is playing.

Some days you may only work on one of the T's, others may touch on all of them.

The point is to attack the higher level goal (learning the song) from multiple
angles, using bite-sized chunks, and not wasting time practicing what you
already know. You'll make better progress, what you learn will be more
applicable to the rest of your playing, and you should find the whole process
far less frustrating.

### Squirrel!

Distractions are a common problem.

These days, the internet makes it even worse: between online videos, ebooks,
websites, apps, remote-learning, etc., there are now so many great sources of
(often free) music education that you can literally waste _hours_ just bouncing
from topic to topic and instructor to instructor.

{{< imgproc distractions Fill "600x400" >}}
Dunno about you, but I read them all.
{{< /imgproc >}}

Eventually you become almost paralyzed. Which of all these terrific topics and
exercises should you be practicing?!

The unhelpful, but correct answer is, of course, **any or all of them**.

A slightly better answer is: whichever you've already started, but haven't yet
mastered.

I actually _encourage_ reading and watching guitar-related videos or whatever
that capture your interest. But reading or watching is not, of course, practice.

So how does one avoid becoming overwhelmed?

I eventually took an old school approach: a simple written list of no more than
five things to practice. Three things are even better, but, trust me, you're far
more likely to remain disciplined if you let the list expand to four or five
occasionally.

I let myself watch whatever content I want, but before I take up any valuable
practice time with the latest cool video or whatever, I look at my list.

If there are already five items on the list, I ask myself if the new thing seems
more important/valuable than anything already there.

Sometimes I realize I've already come close to mastering something on the list,
so I don't feel guilty replacing it with the new thing. Other times, an item on
the list no longer "sparks joy" as Marie Kondo would say, so I drop it and put
the new thing in its place.

Usually, though, I realize I've already got plenty to work on, so I just
bookmark the content and avoid the distraction.

As I write this, my focus list has the following five items written on it. These
are **not** in any sort of priority order &mdash; I work on what I want when I
want:

- Reading. [Practice reading sheet music.]
- Vamps. [A Frank Vignola course I'm following online: [Vamps Jams &
  Improvisation](https://truefire.com/c190)]
- Pentatonics on 3 strings. [Forcing myself to break out of boxes.]
- Goodrick modes. [The first exercises in Mick Goodrick's classic [The Advancing
  Guitarist](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00CAYOI3Y/ref=cm_sw_em_r_mt_dp_U_HCtrCb7QXY4PQ)]
- Harmonize C Major (Triads all positions, all string sets)

Lately, I've been spending most of my practice sessions on the last item. All of
these are "big" topics with several days worth of exercises each.

It's admittedly hard to stay disciplined. As I look at my list, I realize I've
strayed a bit over the past few practice sessions. I haven't practiced a few of
the items for several days. But the important thing is that the list isn't
growing, and that nothing comes off the list without a conscious decision.

It's important to **write the list down** and display it prominently near your
practice area. Don't kid yourself into thinking "It's a short list &mdash; I can
remember it without writing it down." Trust me, you won't.

### Positive reinforcement &mdash; Seeing progress

We are all prey to negative thoughts: "I suck, and I'm just not getting any
better." Progress can be so slow sometimes that you aren't even aware that
you're improving.

Attitude is incredibly important. You really shouldn't let those thoughts creep
in. One thing that helps is to celebrate your successes, no matter how trivial.

This sounds like the silliest kumbaya, self-help crapola imaginable (exactly the
kind of thing engineers despise) but it really does work: It's a good idea to
celebrate mere _attendance_.

Post a multi-month calendar somewhere near your practice area, and every single
day you practice _at all_, even for just a few minutes, put a big red X through
that day.

Believe it or not, it really works. Your brain gets the tiniest little hit of
dopamine every time you cross out another day. You get surprisingly competitive
with yourself, too, not wanting to break a continuous streak. It will also start
to bother you if you see more than a day or two without a red X.

Seriously, this one stupid human trick increased the regularity of my practice
more than anything else I've done.

These days I've started tracking my streaks with the
[strides](https://www.stridesapp.com) app on my phone instead. I just have to
say, "Hey, Siri, log guitar practice." There are similar apps for Android like
[loop](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.isoron.uhabits&hl=en_US).

One other positive reinforcement is to record yourself performing different
songs or exercises periodically. The first time you play a recording you just
made, trust me, every instinct in your body will scream out to delete it as
quickly as possible! But try not to delete anything if you can avoid it.

Every now and then play back an older recording, the older the better. It's very
easy to lose track of how much improvement you've made with such incredibly
small incremental gains, but recordings just don't lie.

Shortly after writing this, I pulled out my phone and played back some old
recordings I'd made of myself. Most of them were somewhat laughable &mdash; I've
improved considerably. Some of the actual songs I'd recorded, though, surprised
me the other way. I've since forgotten how to play those songs, and my playing
doesn't actually sound that bad to me (far better than I remembered it sounding
when I recorded it). That's also a motivation win!

### Removing impediments

Practice is a sort of mini-war: everything is constantly trying it's damnedest
to keep you from practicing. Your job is to eliminate every possible excuse and
impediment.

Starting a practice session needs to be falling-off-a-log easy. The ideal is to
make it easier to practice than not. Anything that might create the slightest
impediment needs to go.

Examples of this include:

- Keeping your guitar out of its case on a stand or hanging on the wall.

- Maintaining a dedicated practice area (just a corner of a room suffices) with
  everything you need out and ready to use: stool, guitar, timer, metronome,
  notebook, tripod, computer/tablet, etc.

- Everything pre-cabled and able to be powered up from a single switch.

You're a million times less likely to even start a practice session If you need
to unpack anything, flip more than one switch, plug in more than one cable, or
if you need to root around to find a pen and paper to write on. It's _way_ too
easy to blow off a practice session for the silliest little impediment!

One caution: I included a computer/tablet in the list of stuff to keep nearby.
They can be invaluable for backing tracks or whatever, but beware of the
distractions they themselves can become. If there is any way to turn off
notifications and alerts, do so. Fight the desire to surf the web or check email
&mdash; that's not practice!

## Time

The other huge impediment to quality practice, of course, is _time_, or, more
specifically, lack of it. None of us, rich or poor, working or retired, get more
than 24 hours in a day, and we all have things other than guitar competing for
that time.

### How much time?

My advice is to set _realistic_ expectations out the gate. It's easy to set
yourself up for failure with an aggressive time goal. Few things are as
demotivating as the feeling of "I'm so far behind".

Behind what? Remember that at one point you couldn't play _at all_. You're
usually the only one setting expectations on yourself: it pays to make them
easily achievable.

Not everyone even has an hour or more per day to dedicate to the guitar. Fewer
still can remain motivated while spending that much time with the instrument.

On the other hand, you're unlikely to make significant progress if you only
dedicate an hour or two every, say, third weekend. _Regular_, near-daily
practice is by far the best way to improve.

The more time you can dedicate each day, of course, the faster your progress
will be, but even five minutes a day three or four times a week (hopefully with
longer periods every week or two) is more than sufficient.

Five minutes a day, three days a week is roughly a bazillion times better than
30 minutes every other week. (They do need to be five by-the-clock, focused,
efficient, dedicated, distraction-free minutes each day, though.)

Five minutes usually isn't that hard for anyone to find. Everyone, no matter how
busy, usually has at least that much slack time somewhere during their day. At
the very least, five minutes less sleep never killed anyone. Is twenty minutes
really that much harder to find?

**You make time for the things you care most about**.

On the other hand, everyone has things in their life more important than guitar,
even professionals that dependent on the instrument for their livelihood. There
is **no** reason to artificially stress about not spending enough time
practicing.

So spend a few minutes thinking back to how you spent your day yesterday, the
day prior, and for the past few weeks. Rank the importance of guitar to those
things. It may well be that guitar is less important than all of them to you,
and you wouldn't want to shorten any of them by even five minutes.

If that's the case, don't feel bad about putting the guitar back in its case for
a while, and consider taking it back up again when you have more time.

If, like most of us, you remember some time spent on things that you'd rather
have spent practicing (or playing!) the guitar, then think of ways to capitalize
on that time.

### Time of day

Divide up your typical day into three segments: morning, mid-day, evening. Ask
yourself two questions:

1. Realistically, which of these segments is more often available for me to
   practice?

2. In the absence of any other constraints, which segment would I _prefer_ to
   use for practice?

Ignore weekdays vs. weekends for the moment. We're all different. Some have more
energy in the mornings, others at night. If other constraints make it impossible
to practice during your preferred segment, though, some practice is far better
than no practice.

Next, spend a moment to think of any specific action you make almost every
single day during your preferred segment. Maybe it's making a cup of coffee.
Maybe it's placing your car-keys in a tray or or on a hook. Try to find
something where you can afford to spend a few extra minutes on the task. Its
good if it's something pleasurable like coffee. Ideally, it's
something you do almost every single day.

That's your trigger.

We are **not** going to associate the trigger with practice! That's way too big
and too much effort. Instead, we'll associate it with something far smaller and
easier: tuning your guitar. In my case, my trigger is retrieving my first cup of
coffee from the coffee maker.

Every time I make coffee in the morning (my preferred segment) I tune up
(or at least pick up) the guitar. I review my
notes/practice-log while I enjoy the coffee.

That typically leads to at least a few minutes of practice. _But it doesn't
matter whether I practice or not._ All that matters is that I physically pick up
the guitar like Pavlov's dog whenever I start making coffee.

Seriously: I can't fill the coffee maker any more without at least thinking of
guitar. It's a stupid pet trick, but it works.

## The squishy nature of time

I'm going to introduce two magic tools in this section.

You may think "five minutes" sounds like too short a time to accomplish anything
useful. Far from it. In fact five minutes can seem _tortuously_ long to remain
truly focused: I frequently practice an individual exercise for even shorter
intervals (three minutes is my preferred interval for many exercises).

You must be 100% focused during each practice interval. It must be focused,
active time with no distractions, no snacking or email.

The only effective way I know to accomplish this is with the first magic tool: a
kitchen timer. Just looking at a wall clock doesn't work. The timer on your
smartphone will work in a pinch, but I prefer [an inexpensive kitchen
timer](http://amzn.com/B01D8EMXIQ).

Decide on the drill or exercise you're going to perform, set the timer for three
minutes, and go. You'll swear the bell must be broken sometimes! Three minutes
can be an _unbelievably_ long time.

I try to get in at least 20 minutes of practice most days. Some days I only have
enough time for a single 3-5 minute exercise. Other days I have time for three
or four 3-minute sprints, plus time for planning my next practice sessions. Even
on days where I have an hour or more to dedicate, I break things into twenty
minute sections with breaks in between.

Seriously, an awful lot can be accomplished with just one three-minute drill a
day for three or more days per week.

A _metronome_ is the other more magic tool to control time.

A metronome has at least three very different uses:

- It's useful to subdivide a beat and feel a groove. Basically, you
  can use a metronome as a standby for an actual drummer (one that never gets
  bored).

- Most commonly, it's useful for building speed. You start practicing something
  at a slow tempo, then gradually increase the tempo when you can play through
  the exercise without mistakes.

- It's the ultimate test proctor (and reality check). You may **think** you've
  learned a lick, chord sequence, or whatever, and can play it well, but there
  is nothing like a metronome to prove just how wrong you are.

It's the latter two that I'd like to focus on here, especially in conjunction
with a kitchen timer.

Let's say you're an absolute beginner, still struggling to switch between G, C,
and D chords in open position. A great way to practice is to set the timer
for three minutes, the metronome to a slow tempo (say 60 BPM) and practice
switching chords every fourth beat. As it gets easier from session to session,
day to day, try every third beat, every second beat, or every beat. Then start
increasing the tempo.

This works for almost any exercise.

Those beats just don't stop! It's _hard_ (and exhausting) to play something
you've not yet completely mastered in time. Believe me: three minutes can seem
an eternity with this sort of exercise.

It can be unbelievably satisfying, though, when you finally complete an exercise
without missing a beat, even if only for three minutes at a time!

---

Next: [Notes]({{< ref "/guitar/Fundamentals/notes" >}})
